README.md, before:

# Workout --> GitHub Heatmap Dashboard

Sync Strava activities, normalize and aggregate them, and generate GitHub-style heatmaps per workout type/year. Populates an interactive, free GitHub Pages-hosted dashboard, automatically refreshed daily.
Generated data is stored on a dedicated `dashboard-data` branch so `main` stays fork-sync friendly.

- View the Interactive [Activity Dashboard](https://aspain.github.io/git-sweaty/)
- Once setup is complete, this dashboard link will automatically update to your own GitHub Pages URL.

<!-- HEATMAPS:START -->
Preview:

![Dashboard Preview](site/readme-preview.png)
<!-- HEATMAPS:END -->

## Quick Start

### Option 1 (Recommended): Run the setup script

This is the fastest path, but it requires a local clone and GitHub CLI (`gh`) auth.

1. Fork this repo to your account: [Fork this repository](../../fork)
2. Clone your fork and `cd` into it:

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/<your-username>/<repo-name>.git
   cd <repo-name>
   ```
3. Create a [Strava API application](https://www.strava.com/settings/api). Set **Authorization Callback Domain** to `localhost`, then copy:
   - `STRAVA_CLIENT_ID`
   - `STRAVA_CLIENT_SECRET`
4. Make sure GitHub CLI is authenticated:

   ```bash
   gh auth login
   ```

5. Run:

   ```bash
   python3 scripts/setup_auth.py --client-id STRAVA_CLIENT_ID
   ```

   When prompted, paste `STRAVA_CLIENT_SECRET` (it is hidden input).

   The script will:
   - open Strava OAuth in your browser
   - capture the callback code locally
   - exchange it for a refresh token
   - set `STRAVA_CLIENT_ID`, `STRAVA_CLIENT_SECRET`, and `STRAVA_REFRESH_TOKEN` via `gh secret set`
6. Enable GitHub Pages (repo → [Settings → Pages](../../settings/pages)):
   - Under **Build and deployment**, set **Source** to **GitHub Actions**.
7. Run [Sync Strava Heatmaps](../../actions/workflows/sync.yml):
   - If GitHub shows an **Enable workflows** button in [Actions](../../actions), click it first.
   - Go to [Actions](../../actions) → [Sync Strava Heatmaps](../../actions/workflows/sync.yml) → **Run workflow**.
   - Keep **Update README dashboard URL in this fork** enabled on your first run so your README link is personalized automatically.
   - The same workflow is also scheduled in `.github/workflows/sync.yml` (daily at `15:00 UTC`).
8. Open your live site at `https://<your-username>.github.io/<repo-name>/` after deploy finishes.

### Option 2: Manual setup (no local clone required)

1. Fork this repo to your account: [Fork this repository](../../fork)

2. Create a [Strava API application](https://www.strava.com/settings/api). Set **Authorization Callback Domain** to `localhost`, then copy:
   - `STRAVA_CLIENT_ID`
   - `STRAVA_CLIENT_SECRET`

3. Generate a **refresh token** via OAuth (the token shown on the Strava API page often does **not** work).
   Open this URL in your browser (replace `CLIENT_ID` with the Client ID value from your Strava API application page):

   ```text
   https://www.strava.com/oauth/authorize?client_id=CLIENT_ID&response_type=code&redirect_uri=http://localhost/exchange_token&approval_prompt=force&scope=read,activity:read_all
   ```

   After approval you’ll be redirected to a `localhost` URL that won’t load. That’s expected.
   Example redirect URL:

   ```text
   http://localhost/exchange_token?state=&code=12345&scope=read,activity:read_all
   ```

   Copy the value of the `code` query parameter from the failed URL (in this example, `12345`) and exchange it.
   Run this command in a terminal app (macOS/Linux Terminal, or Windows PowerShell/Command Prompt).
   Use the `CLIENT_ID` and `CLIENT_SECRET` values from your Strava API application page in Step 2.

   ```bash
   curl -X POST https://www.strava.com/oauth/token \
     -d client_id=CLIENT_ID \
     -d client_secret=CLIENT_SECRET \
     -d code=THE_CODE_FROM_THE_URL \
     -d grant_type=authorization_code
   ```

   Copy the `refresh_token` from the response.

4. Add GitHub secrets (repo → [Settings → Secrets and variables → Actions](../../settings/secrets/actions)):
   - `STRAVA_CLIENT_ID`
   - `STRAVA_CLIENT_SECRET`
   - `STRAVA_REFRESH_TOKEN` (from the OAuth exchange above)

5. Enable GitHub Pages (repo → [Settings → Pages](../../settings/pages)):
   - Under **Build and deployment**, set **Source** to **GitHub Actions**.

6. Run [Sync Strava Heatmaps](../../actions/workflows/sync.yml):
   - If GitHub shows an **Enable workflows** button in [Actions](../../actions), click it first.
   - Go to [Actions](../../actions) → [Sync Strava Heatmaps](../../actions/workflows/sync.yml) → **Run workflow**.
   - Keep **Update README dashboard URL in this fork** enabled on your first run so your README link is personalized automatically.
   - The same workflow is also scheduled in `.github/workflows/sync.yml` (daily at `15:00 UTC`).

7. Open your live site at `https://<your-username>.github.io/<repo-name>/` after deploy finishes.

Both options run the same workflow, which will:
- restore persisted state from the `dashboard-data` branch (if present)
- sync raw activities into `activities/raw/` (local-only; not committed)
- normalize + merge into `data/activities_normalized.json` (persisted history)
- aggregate into `data/daily_aggregates.json`
- generate SVGs in `heatmaps/`
- build `site/data.json`
- commit generated outputs to `dashboard-data` (not `main`)

## Fork Sync Best Practice

- To pull in new updates and features from the original repo, use GitHub's **Sync fork** button on your fork's `main` branch.
- This project is set up to make upstream syncs much less likely to hit merge conflicts from personal dashboard data.
- After syncing, run [Sync Strava Heatmaps](../../actions/workflows/sync.yml) if you want your dashboard refreshed immediately.

## Activity Type Note

By default, all Strava activity types are included automatically when you run the workflow.

To narrow the dashboard to specific activity types:
1. Edit [`config.yaml`](config.yaml) in your fork.
2. Set `activities.include_all_types: false`.
3. Set `activities.types` to only the types you want.
4. Run [Sync Strava Heatmaps](../../actions/workflows/sync.yml) again.

Example:

```yaml
activities:
  include_all_types: false
  types:
    - Run
    - Ride
    - WeightTraining
```

## Configuration (Optional)

Everything in this section is optional. Defaults work without changes.
Base settings live in `config.yaml`.

Key options:
- `sync.start_date` (optional `YYYY-MM-DD` lower bound for history)
- `sync.lookback_years` (optional rolling lower bound; used only when `sync.start_date` is unset)
- `sync.recent_days` (sync recent activities even while backfilling)
- `sync.resume_backfill` (persist cursor to continue older pages across days)
- `activities.types` (featured activity types shown first in UI)
- `activities.include_all_types` (include non-featured Strava types; default `true`)
- `activities.group_other_types` (auto-group non-featured types into smart categories)
- `activities.other_bucket` (fallback group name when no smart match is found)
- `activities.group_aliases` (optional explicit map of a raw/canonical type to a group)
- `activities.type_aliases` (map Strava types to your canonical types before grouping)
- `units.distance` (`mi` or `km`)
- `units.elevation` (`ft` or `m`)
- `rate_limits.*` (free Strava API throttling caps)

## Notes

- Raw activities are stored locally for processing but are not committed (`activities/raw/` is ignored). This prevents publishing detailed per-activity payloads and GPS location traces.
- If neither `sync.start_date` nor `sync.lookback_years` is set, sync backfills all available Strava history.
- On first run for a new athlete, the workflow auto-resets persisted outputs (`data/*.json`, `heatmaps/`, `site/data.json`) on `dashboard-data` to avoid mixing data across forks. A fingerprint-only file is stored at `data/athletes.json` and does not include athlete IDs or profile data.
- The sync script rate-limits to free Strava API caps (200 overall / 15 min, 2,000 overall daily; 100 read / 15 min, 1,000 read daily). The cursor is stored in `data/backfill_state.json` and resumes automatically. Once backfill is complete, only the recent sync runs.
- The GitHub Pages site is optimized for responsive desktop/mobile viewing.

Commit message:

Update README to clarify data storage for forks
Clarify that Strava activity data is stored on a dedicated branch to maintain fork-sync compatibility.

README.md, after:

# Workout --> GitHub Heatmap Dashboard

Sync Strava activities, normalize and aggregate them, and generate GitHub-style heatmaps per workout type/year. Populates an interactive, free GitHub Pages-hosted dashboard, automatically refreshed daily.

- View the Interactive [Activity Dashboard](https://aspain.github.io/git-sweaty/)
- Once setup is complete, this dashboard link will automatically update to your own GitHub Pages URL.

<!-- HEATMAPS:START -->
Preview:

![Dashboard Preview](site/readme-preview.png)
<!-- HEATMAPS:END -->

## Quick Start

### Option 1 (Recommended): Run the setup script

This is the fastest path, but it requires a local clone and GitHub CLI (`gh`) auth.

1. Fork this repo to your account: [Fork this repository](../../fork)
2. Clone your fork and `cd` into it:

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/<your-username>/<repo-name>.git
   cd <repo-name>
   ```
3. Create a [Strava API application](https://www.strava.com/settings/api). Set **Authorization Callback Domain** to `localhost`, then copy:
   - `STRAVA_CLIENT_ID`
   - `STRAVA_CLIENT_SECRET`
4. Make sure GitHub CLI is authenticated:

   ```bash
   gh auth login
   ```

5. Run:

   ```bash
   python3 scripts/setup_auth.py --client-id STRAVA_CLIENT_ID
   ```

   When prompted, paste `STRAVA_CLIENT_SECRET` (it is hidden input).

   The script will:
   - open Strava OAuth in your browser
   - capture the callback code locally
   - exchange it for a refresh token
   - set `STRAVA_CLIENT_ID`, `STRAVA_CLIENT_SECRET`, and `STRAVA_REFRESH_TOKEN` via `gh secret set`
6. Enable GitHub Pages (repo → [Settings → Pages](../../settings/pages)):
   - Under **Build and deployment**, set **Source** to **GitHub Actions**.
7. Run [Sync Strava Heatmaps](../../actions/workflows/sync.yml):
   - If GitHub shows an **Enable workflows** button in [Actions](../../actions), click it first.
   - Go to [Actions](../../actions) → [Sync Strava Heatmaps](../../actions/workflows/sync.yml) → **Run workflow**.
   - Keep **Update README dashboard URL in this fork** enabled on your first run so your README link is personalized automatically.
   - The same workflow is also scheduled in `.github/workflows/sync.yml` (daily at `15:00 UTC`).
8. Open your live site at `https://<your-username>.github.io/<repo-name>/` after deploy finishes.

### Option 2: Manual setup (no local clone required)

1. Fork this repo to your account: [Fork this repository](../../fork)

2. Create a [Strava API application](https://www.strava.com/settings/api). Set **Authorization Callback Domain** to `localhost`, then copy:
   - `STRAVA_CLIENT_ID`
   - `STRAVA_CLIENT_SECRET`

3. Generate a **refresh token** via OAuth (the token shown on the Strava API page often does **not** work).
   Open this URL in your browser (replace `CLIENT_ID` with the Client ID value from your Strava API application page):

   ```text
   https://www.strava.com/oauth/authorize?client_id=CLIENT_ID&response_type=code&redirect_uri=http://localhost/exchange_token&approval_prompt=force&scope=read,activity:read_all
   ```

   After approval you’ll be redirected to a `localhost` URL that won’t load. That’s expected.
   Example redirect URL:

   ```text
   http://localhost/exchange_token?state=&code=12345&scope=read,activity:read_all
   ```

   Copy the value of the `code` query parameter from the failed URL (in this example, `12345`) and exchange it.
   Run this command in a terminal app (macOS/Linux Terminal, or Windows PowerShell/Command Prompt).
   Use the `CLIENT_ID` and `CLIENT_SECRET` values from your Strava API application page in Step 2.

   ```bash
   curl -X POST https://www.strava.com/oauth/token \
     -d client_id=CLIENT_ID \
     -d client_secret=CLIENT_SECRET \
     -d code=THE_CODE_FROM_THE_URL \
     -d grant_type=authorization_code
   ```

   Copy the `refresh_token` from the response.

4. Add GitHub secrets (repo → [Settings → Secrets and variables → Actions](../../settings/secrets/actions)):
   - `STRAVA_CLIENT_ID`
   - `STRAVA_CLIENT_SECRET`
   - `STRAVA_REFRESH_TOKEN` (from the OAuth exchange above)

5. Enable GitHub Pages (repo → [Settings → Pages](../../settings/pages)):
   - Under **Build and deployment**, set **Source** to **GitHub Actions**.

6. Run [Sync Strava Heatmaps](../../actions/workflows/sync.yml):
   - If GitHub shows an **Enable workflows** button in [Actions](../../actions), click it first.
   - Go to [Actions](../../actions) → [Sync Strava Heatmaps](../../actions/workflows/sync.yml) → **Run workflow**.
   - Keep **Update README dashboard URL in this fork** enabled on your first run so your README link is personalized automatically.
   - The same workflow is also scheduled in `.github/workflows/sync.yml` (daily at `15:00 UTC`).

7. Open your live site at `https://<your-username>.github.io/<repo-name>/` after deploy finishes.

Both options run the same workflow, which will:
- restore persisted state from the `dashboard-data` branch (if present)
- sync raw activities into `activities/raw/` (local-only; not committed)
- normalize + merge into `data/activities_normalized.json` (persisted history)
- aggregate into `data/daily_aggregates.json`
- generate SVGs in `heatmaps/`
- build `site/data.json`
- commit generated outputs to `dashboard-data` (not `main`)

## Fork Sync Best Practice

- To pull in new updates and features from the original repo, use GitHub's **Sync fork** button on your fork's `main` branch.
- Strava activity data is stored on a dedicated `dashboard-data` branch which deploys your data to the dashboard, but doesn't commit to the repo - so `main` stays fork-sync friendly.
- After syncing, run [Sync Strava Heatmaps](../../actions/workflows/sync.yml) if you want your dashboard refreshed immediately.

## Activity Type Note

By default, all Strava activity types are included automatically when you run the workflow.

To narrow the dashboard to specific activity types:
1. Edit [`config.yaml`](config.yaml) in your fork.
2. Set `activities.include_all_types: false`.
3. Set `activities.types` to only the types you want.
4. Run [Sync Strava Heatmaps](../../actions/workflows/sync.yml) again.

Example:

```yaml
activities:
  include_all_types: false
  types:
    - Run
    - Ride
    - WeightTraining
```

## Configuration (Optional)

Everything in this section is optional. Defaults work without changes.
Base settings live in `config.yaml`.

Key options:
- `sync.start_date` (optional `YYYY-MM-DD` lower bound for history)
- `sync.lookback_years` (optional rolling lower bound; used only when `sync.start_date` is unset)
- `sync.recent_days` (sync recent activities even while backfilling)
- `sync.resume_backfill` (persist cursor to continue older pages across days)
- `activities.types` (featured activity types shown first in UI)
- `activities.include_all_types` (include non-featured Strava types; default `true`)
- `activities.group_other_types` (auto-group non-featured types into smart categories)
- `activities.other_bucket` (fallback group name when no smart match is found)
- `activities.group_aliases` (optional explicit map of a raw/canonical type to a group)
- `activities.type_aliases` (map Strava types to your canonical types before grouping)
- `units.distance` (`mi` or `km`)
- `units.elevation` (`ft` or `m`)
- `rate_limits.*` (free Strava API throttling caps)

## Notes

- Raw activities are stored locally for processing but are not committed (`activities/raw/` is ignored). This prevents publishing detailed per-activity payloads and GPS location traces.
- If neither `sync.start_date` nor `sync.lookback_years` is set, sync backfills all available Strava history.
- On first run for a new athlete, the workflow auto-resets persisted outputs (`data/*.json`, `heatmaps/`, `site/data.json`) on `dashboard-data` to avoid mixing data across forks. A fingerprint-only file is stored at `data/athletes.json` and does not include athlete IDs or profile data.
- The sync script rate-limits to free Strava API caps (200 overall / 15 min, 2,000 overall daily; 100 read / 15 min, 1,000 read daily). The cursor is stored in `data/backfill_state.json` and resumes automatically. Once backfill is complete, only the recent sync runs.
- The GitHub Pages site is optimized for responsive desktop/mobile viewing.
